---
layout: post
title:  "Semaphore and shared memory in Linux"
author: Paul Guo
date:   2017-07-29
published: true
---

For IPC there are two kinds of implmentation due to historical reason: One is Posix and another is System V.


## About semaphore

### The Posix Usage

1. Firstly initalize a sem_t which is used for PV.

   Either call sem_init(3) on shared memory (by thread or process) with memory size sem_t.

   Or call sem_open(3): It will use a filename and create shared memory.

   It implementation is similar to open(2)+ftruncate(2)+mmap(2) (if needed).

2. Do normal PV via sem_post(3) or sem_wait(3), etc.

   In Linux, they finally call syscall futex(2).

### The System V usage

1. Generate a unique identifier using ftok().

   It is possible there is identifier conflict with different filenames.

   It needs a real file whose information (extracted via syscall stat(2)) will be combinined into the identifer.

   Note ftok() is widely used by System V IPC funtions to generate a identifer.

2. General functions.

   semget(2): create or get one semaphore identifier.

   semop(2): PV operations.

   semctl(2): semaphore control functions.

### Internals

1. Posix: They use futex(2) so unlike System V, it could avoid trapping into kernel sometimes.

2. System V: Use general kernel semaphore functions in each syscall for PV. e.g. up_write().

### Comparison

1. For System V, the IPC identifier is possibly not unique for different filenames.

   This limitation applies to other System V IPC.

2. Posix just supports +1 or -1, while System V supports more.

3. In theory posix should be faster than System V for same functionality (because of futex(2)).

## About shared memory

### The posix solution

   shm_open(3) + ftruncate(2) + mmap(2)

   If you check glibc code, you will see that shm_open(3) is very similar to open(2), but better not use open(2) directly.

   The theory is rather simple: Use the mmap() for sharing with MAP_SHARED.

### The System V solution

1. You need to get a IPC identifier by calling ftok() just like other System V IPC does.

2. shmget(2)/shmat(2)/shmdt(2)/shmctl(2)

   shmget(2): create or open a shared memory identifier.

   shmat(2)/shmdt(2): map/unmap the shared.

   shmctl(2): manipulate the shared memory (e.g. remove, etc)

3. Internals

   In Linux kernel, it is still using file mmap(2) on tmpfs. You could find file /SYSV*** in /proc/$pid/maps, e.g.

```
   $ cat /proc/139152/maps |grep SYSV

   7fe5d3d3d000-7fe5e9779000 rw-s 00000000 00:04 7929868                    /SYSV02625a01 (deleted)
```

### Comparison

About System V:

1. Could not modify shared memory size on-the-fly while Posix could.

2. It is created on tmpfs (It looks that it must be on memory).
  
   Users who use posix might want to create the file on a tmpfs for performance.

3. Sometime users might be easy to forget to clean up the shared memory since

   the entry is not automatically removed after the final detach. Especially

   when programs exit abnormally (e.g. kill -9). You could check via command "ipcs -m".


